Active listening

More than just paying attention

Kathryn Robertson, MBBS, FRACGP, MEd, is Senior Lecturer, Department of General Practice, University of

Melbourne, and a general practitioner, Victoria. k.robertson@unimelb.edu.an

‘Communication skills courses are an essential component of undergraduate and postgraduate training and effective communication skills

are #ctively promoted by ‘medical defence organisations as'a means of decreasing litigation. This article discusses active listening, a diffi cult +
- “discipline for:anyone to’ practise, “and examines why this is particularly s so for doctors. It draws together themes from key literature i in the field

of ¢ communication skills, and examines how these theories apply i in " general practice.

‘If we could all just learn to listen, everything
else would fall into place. Listening is the
key to being patient centred’.

lan McWhinney!

Lisening is consistently included among
key consulting skills in both medical texts?
and results of patient surveys.” Silverman
et al® in particular, provide an excellent
summary of the evidence then available
supporting the importance of listening.
Levenstein and his team at the
University of Western Ontario developed
a patient centred model consisting of six
interconnecting components.® While
listening to the patient underpins the whole
model, it is particularly fundamental to four
of the components:
e exploring both the disease and illness
experience
e understanding the whole person
e finding common ground, and
e enhancing the patient-doctor relationship.
Active listening extends this core skill and
further develops its therapeutic role beyond
simple information gathering.

Active listening

Active listening is a specific communication
skill, based on the work of psychologist
Carl Rogers, which involves giving free and

undivided attention to the speaker. Knights®
defines free attention as: '.. placing all of
one's attention and awareness at the disposal
of another person, listening with interest
and appreciating without interrupting’. This
is a rare and valuable commitment, as
most discussions involve competition for a
space to speak. Active listening is a difficult
discipline. It requires intense concentration
and attention to everything the person is
conveying, both verbally and nonverbally. It
requires the listener to empty themselves
of personal concerns, distractions and
preconceptions.® Hugh Mackay points out
in The good listener that this takes courage,
generosity and patience.

As Carl Rogers said in 1980: Attentive
listening means giving one's total and
undivided attention to the other person and
tells the other that we are interested and
concerned. Listening is difficult work that
we will not undertake unless we have deep
respect and care for the other... we listen
not only with our ears, but with our eyes,
mind, heart and imagination, as well. We
listen to what is going on within ourselves,
as well as to what is taking place in the
person we are hearing. We listen to the
words of the other, but we also listen to the
messages buried in the words. We listen
to the voice, the appearance, and the body

language of the other... We simply try to
absorb everything the speaker is saying
verbally and nonverbally without adding,
subtracting, or amending'.*

It is unusual to be given the opportunity
to follow through a train of thought without
interruption. To do so is both a validation
of the thought processes (although not
necessarily of the views themselves), and
of the individual. While the listener does
not introduce their own views or solutions,
they are far from passive. Instead they
draw on high level skills in assisting the
speaker to reflect: listening and exploring,
understanding and relating, and focussing
and assisting.?

Active listening skills

Active listening skills are an extension of
generic communication skills and involve
both verbal and nonverbal communication
{Table 7).5%1 In some ways, active listening
is characterised more by what is not done,
than what is done. This is because real
active listening requires the listener to avoid
common responses when listening, even
internally, and these are very difficult habits
to break. In other circumstances many of
these responses may be entirely appropriate,
but in active listening these are commonly
called ‘road blocks."

Australian Family Physician Vol. 34, No. 12, December 2005 » 1053

Education: Active listening ~ more than just paying attention

Roadblocks

Judging
Judging may include:
e criticising
e name calling or labelling
o diagnosing
e praising evaluatively.
Carl Rogers stated that the natural tendency
to evaluate from the listener's own frame of
reference, and approve or disapprove of what
another person is saying, is the major barrier
to successful interpersonal communication.
He felt this was particularly the case when
the topic was linked to strong emotions.
This is an area that can be especially
difficult for medical practitioners. After all,
evaluating and diagnosing, using a frame
of reference based on extensive training
and experience, is exactly the task of most
medical consultations. However, in special
circumstances that benefit from active
listening, the doctor must consciously
recognise the need, commit to actively
listen, and move into a different domain of
interaction with their patient.
There have been strong moves from
consumer groups to encourage doctors

away from the habit of labslling people
by their disease, eg. to refer to ‘a person
with epilepsy’ rather than ‘an epileptic’. To
label someone by one characteristic, even
if this is accurate, is to deny all their other
experiences, talents, weaknesses, and
personality traits. It reduces them to their
disease, and denies them their individuality.
Bolton" quoted the psychologist Clark
Moustakas in his book People skills: ‘Labels
and classifications make it appear that we
know the other, when actually, we have
caught the shadow and not the substance.
Since we are convinced we know ourselves
and others... [wel no longer actually see
what is happening before us and in us, and,
not knowing that we do not know, we make
no effort to be in contact with the real’.

Suggesting solutions

These type of ‘roadblocks’ include:

e ordering

¢ threatening

s moralising

e excessive/inappropriate questioning

° advising.

This is another area that can be particularly
problematic for medical practitioners

Table 1. Active listening skills

Attentive body language

e Appropriate body movement
e Appropriate facial expressions
° Appropriate eye contact

¢ Nondistracting environment

Following skills

¢ Interested ‘door openers’
° Minimal verbal encouragers

o Attentive silences

Reflecting skills

e Reflect back feelings and content
¢ Summarise the major issues

e Posture and gestures showing involvement and engagement

(Giving the speaker space to tell their story in their own way)

o Infrequent, timely and considered questions

(Restating the feeling and/or content with understanding and acceptance)
« Paraphrase {check periodically that you've understood)

because that is what patients generally seek
from their doctors ~ solutions, answers,
cures, and guidance.

However, there can be risks in
suggesting solutions. It takes responsibility
away from the other person. It implicitly
disempowers the other person by saying:
"You can't solve the problem, but | am
better/smarter/more worldly than you, so
| have to do it for you" This can make the
person feel belittied or patronised.

A person will usually have been
pondering their problem for some time
before they present with it. If a solution
seems obvious to the listener after only a
short time, the chances are it is obvious
enough to have occurred to the person with
the problem as well. To suggest otherwise
is an insult to their intelligence. Therefore
the issues then become: have they already
tried the solution? Presumably it has already
failed, what factors led to its failure? If they
have not tried the obvious solution, why
not? What are the other factors about the
situation that means they have decided not
to proceed with the obvious solution? More
active listening is needed!

A sign that suggesting solutions at
this particular point is not appropriate
is when the speaker starts to block the
suggestions. This can be frustrating to both
parties, and distract them from teasing out
all the thoughts and emotions about the
problem. Alternatively, some people simply
‘shut down’, outwardly appearing passive
and compliant, but inwardly disengaged
and resigned to not getting the help they
really need.

Avoiding the other's concerns

A third type of ‘roadblock’ is avoiding the
other's concerns by:

e diverting

° logical argument

e reassuring.

These roadblocks deny the person the
opportunity to talk about their problems, or
worse still, try to convince them that they
really aren't serious problems, and they are
foolish to be worried about them.

1054 4 Australian Family Physician Vol. 34, No. 12, December 2005

Education: Active listening — more than just paying attention

Avoidance can be conscious or
unconscious. Sometimes people simply don't
hear the cues, the requests to be listened
to. But sometimes avoidance is a conscious
choice. Perhaps the topic is too challenging
to the listener, perhaps they simply don't
have the time or energy to expend at this
particular time. Perhaps they wish to remain
in control of the conversation, to keep it in
areas in which they feel comfortable.

There may be legitimate reasons why it
is inappropriate to actively listen in any given
situation, but rather than deny the need,
it is usually more helpful to acknowledge
it, and arrange a more appropriate time or
setting to address it. It is also surprising the
power of simple acknowledgment in itself.
If a person's concerns and worries are not
addressed, they tend to compound over
time, which may be prevented by small,
timely interventions when the issues are
first raised.’ As McWhinney points out in
his book A textbook of family medicine, a
particular characteristic of general practice
is that, while time in the short term is
pressured and difficult to find, the ongoing
relationships between GPs and their patients
means that there are abundant opportunities
to revisit issues in the long term. And, taking
a long term view more naturally follows the
natural evolution, and (hopefully) resolution
of life problems. General practitioners
can use the passage of time to their own
advantage, and divide the exploration of
issues, and the application of coping
strategies into manageable ‘chunks’.

Active listening in clinical practice

McWhinney asserts that the greatest single
problem in clinical interviewing is the failure
to let the patient tell their story.* Active
listening is an advanced communication
skill, which takes practise and constant
awareness to avoid slipping into the patterns
summarised as roadblocks. It is not a skill
that can or should be used all the time, for
example in a medical emergency, or when
the patient is drug affected or psychotic.
Besides being clinically inappropriate, when
what a situation requires is professional

judgment and expertise, it is quite tiring
when done well. To completely empty
oneself of ones own prejudices, patterns of
responding and frame of reference, and to
try to understand all of this about another
person is an act of great generosity and
respect. It is a commitment of not only time,
but mental energy and a preparedness to
explore another person's world and see the
way life appears to them. People often
respond to this intention, even if some of
the details are clumsy. And in the process of
exploring a situation so that another person
fully understands it, the situation often
becomes clearer to the speaker as well, and
possible directions for changing the situation
emerge from the mire.”

Learning active listening

“You can learn to be a better listener, but
learning it is not like learning a skill that is
added to what we know. It is a peeling away
of things that interfere with listening, our
preoccupations, our fear, of how we might
respond to what we hear’

lan McWhinney!

Conflict of interest: none declared.

References

1. Kelly L. Listening to patients: a lifetime perspective
from Ian McWhinney. CJRM 1998;3:168-9.

2. Fraser RCE. Clinical method. A general practice
approach. London: Butterworths 1987;87.

13.

Stewart M, Brown JB, Weston WW, et al. Patient
centred medicine. Transforming the clinical method.
Thousand Qaks, California: Sage Publications,
1995;267.

McWhinney IR. A textbook of family medicine.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989.

Silverman J, Kurtz S, Draper J. Skills for
communicating with patients. Oxon: Radcliffe
Medical Press, 1998.

Novack DH, Dube C, Goldstein MG. Teaching
medical interviewing. A basic course on interviewing
and the physician-patient relationship. Arch Intern
Med 1992;152:1814-20.

General Practice in Australia. Department of Health
and Aged Care, Commonwealth of Australia:
Canberra 2000.

Kelly L. Physician as listener. Can Fam Physician
2001;47:233-5.

Knights S. Reflection and learning: the importance
of a listener. In: Boud D, Keogh R, Walker D,
editors, Reflection: turning experience into learning,
New York: Nichols Publishing Company, 1985.

. Mackay H. The good listener. Better relationships

through better communication. (Previously
published as Why don't people listen?) Sydney: Pan
Macmillan, 1994.

. Bolton R. People skills. How to assert yourself, listen

to others, and resolve conflicts. New Jersey: Prentice

Hall, 1986.

. Stuart MR, Lieberman JA. The fifteen minute

hour. Applied psychotherapy for the primary care
physician. New York: Praeger, 1986.

Kurtz S, Silverman J, Draper J. Teaching and
learning communication skills in medicine.

Abingdon: Radcliffe Medical Press Ltd, 1998;245.

Correspondence
Email: afp@racgp.org.au

Australian Family Physician Vol. 34, No. 12, December 2005 » 1065

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
